Kinematics & Injury Risk Prediction in the Elite Baseball Pitcher

The official project version is titled [DLDataScript_v3_EV.ipynb], from which the results and conclusions were made.

INTRODUCTION: Baseball pitchers have steadily increased their throwing velocities over the past two decades. Concurrently, there has been an increase in the prevalence of upper extremity injuries in professional pitchers. The literature has recognized a relationship between the magnitude of internal elbow varus torque and both fastball velocity and ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) injury. Pitchers who can achieve elite throwing velocities (fastball velocity > 89 mph) may have varying amounts of internal elbow varus torque, which suggests that specific mechanics may alter a pitcher’s injury risk. The trends in throwing velocity and UCL injury beg the question: Can pitchers achieve elite throwing velocities while maintaining safe amounts of elbow varus torque? While there may be a relationship between ball velocity and injury rates, employing specific pitching mechanics may allow pitchers to throw at higher velocities in a relatively safe manner. Individual kinematics inducing changes in upper extremity forces have been identified independent of one another, but the combinatory effect on either beneficial or deleterious mechanics have not been quantified. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to identify the combination of biomechanical variables in sequence that are associated with elbow varus torque in elite pitchers. Potential relationships between the mechanics that dictate throwing performance that are similarly observed to increase kinetic measures predictive of upper extremity injury were identified. This investigation hypothesized that (1) a combination of specific mechanical contributions will be associated with high throwing velocities and elbow varus torque and (2) distal extremity kinematics will be more predictive of elbow varus torque. METHODS: The data used in this study was accessed from the Driveline Baseball Research and Development OpenBiomechanics project (link to repository). It includes anonymous baseball biomechanical data in the form of raw or processed data available to the public. Collection procedures were ethically approved by the Western Institutional Review Board (# WB-DLR-115). Data from 21 pitchers was used based on the criteria that pitch velocity must be greater than 89 mph. The sample had the following means and standard deviations: age = 22.74 ± 2.01 years; height = 1.89 ± 0.05 m; mass = 92.56 ± 8.44 kg. The majority of the sample consists of college pitchers (62%), followed by independent (24%), and minor league pitchers (14%). Of the 21 pitchers, 19 (90.5%) were right-handed throwers and 2 (9.5%) were left-handed throwers. The original marker-based data was collected using 15 OptiTrack Prime 17W (NaturalPoint Inc.) motion-capture cameras capturing at 360 Hz. Thirty-nine retroreflective markers were attached to pitchers to form a C3D model (marker set). Full signal data, in addition to participant meta data, were downloaded from the OpenBiomechanics GitHub, and pitchers were filtered to ensure they met the elite velocity criteria. Data filtering, processing, and analysis was performed with Python version 3.12.7 (Python Software Foundation) and accessed the Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib packages. The use of a classification and regression tree (CART) was used to assess the characteristics of kinematics utilized by pitchers with high and low internal elbow varus torques. The model split two groups of pitchers based on the kinematic(s) most related to elbow varus torque, then recursively partitioned the data for subsequent relatedness. Mean square error (MSE) reduction was used to determine the optimal split in the regression tree. To predict or relate biomechanical variables to elbow varus, MSE measures the average squared difference between the actual and predicted values for elbow varus torque. At each node in the tree, an optimal split was identified and selected to reduce MSE for subsequent levels in the tree. Cross-validation scoring was used to evaluate the model’s performance by identifying predictive error with respect to mean values. As an effect, tree pruning parameters specified a max depth of 3, a minimum of 4 samples per split, a minimum of 4 samples per leaf, and a minimum reduction of MSE of 0.1. For each kinematic variable that was associated with high or low elbow varus, each level of the CART determines how predictive it is of elbow varus torque. Therefore, the CART identified the mechanics employed by elite pitchers to reduce or elevate the risk of injury to the UCL. RESULTS: The kinematics that best predicted elbow varus torque were as follows: (1) elbow flexion angle at foot plant, (2) torso rotation angle at ball release, and (3) torso anterior tilt angle at foot plant. Each node of the tree can be interpreted to assess the kinematic(s) predictive of low or high elbow varus torque. The first split criteria saw pitchers with less than 95.3 degrees of foot plant elbow flexion had the lowest torque values (n = 7, elbow varus torque = 105.1 N·m). If foot plant elbow flexion exceeded the first split criteria, torso rotation at ball release was the second split criteria. Greater torso rotation at ball release was predictive of the second lowest elbow varus torque (n = 4, elbow varus torque = 109.7 N·m). If torso rotation at ball release was less than the second split criteria, torso anterior tilt at foot plant was the third split criteria. Torso anterior tilt angles at foot plant less than negative 10.9 degrees, or torso angles associated with torso extension, were predictive of the second highest elbow varus torque (n = 6, elbow varus torque = 124 N·m). When torso anterior tilt angles at foot plant were greater than negative 10.9 degrees, elbow varus torque was predicted to be the highest (n = 4, elbow varus torque = 137.5 N·m). To determine the predicted elbow varus torque, the previous splits must be taken into account. For example, the highest elbow varus torque was not predicted solely due to the magnitude of torso anterior tilt at foot plant. Rather, higher elbow varus torque was achieved after meeting the kinematic parameters leading to the third split criteria. CONCLUSIONS: The purpose of this study was to identify the combination of biomechanical variables in sequence that are associated with elbow varus torque in elite pitchers. In support of the hypothesis, distal extremity kinematics were most predictive of elbow varus torque as characterized by elbow flexion at foot plant. The hypothesis was also supported by the coordination of specific kinematics predicting the greatest amount of elbow varus torque. High elbow varus torque was best predicted by greater amounts of elbow flexion at foot plant, followed by greater torso rotation angles at ball release and greater torso anterior tilt angles at foot plant. Pitchers who met these kinematic parameters were predicted to have 137.5 N·m of elbow varus torque. Alternatively, pitchers who had lesser elbow flexion at foot plant were predicted to experience 105 N·m of elbow varus torque. The kinematics of the upper extremities may be affected by the trunk kinematics found in the regression tree, highlighting the importance of trunk mechanics in elite pitchers. Also, the importance of timing became relevant to the included kinematics. Two of the three predictive kinematics were captured at foot plant, occurring earlier in the pitching sequence. Thus, the effects the proximal segments have on the kinematics of more distal segments early in the pitching motion likely influence the magnitude of elbow varus torque.
